[MUSIC PLAYING]
Stanford University.
So back a little bit.
Still back in the neurobiology.
Back to the anterior cingulate.
Remember anterior
cingulate again.
All that empathy stuff,
feeling somebody else's pain.
That business about
something metaphorical,
something symbolic
about pain and empathy
is happening in there.
Something people
have been speculating
about for about 10
years now has to do
with a class of
neurons that have come
to be called mirror neurons.
Mirror neurons were
first identified
in motor parts of the
cortex, parts that
tell you which muscles to move.
And these are neurons
that don't get excited
when you are, for example,
moving your arm like this.
And they don't get excited
if you're watching somebody
moving their arm like this.
But they do get
excited if both of you
are doing it at the same time or
closely in time with each other
if they're mirroring each other.
So people took a
look at this and this
immediately became an
area of a lot of research.
And from the first nanosecond
when people were discussing
mirror neurons, of course
what they were immediately
talking about is this is
some neuronal cellular basis
of empathy, feeling
somebody else's pain.
That sort of thing.
There's got to be mirror neurons
in the anterior cingulate
that's doing more abstract
versions of feeling somebody
else's actions and feeling
somebody else's feelings
and all that sort of thing.
Totally irresistible.
There has not been
a paper written
on the neurobiology of
empathy in the last decade
without the word mirror getting
some place or other in there.
Totally cool idea.
Still not yet demonstrated.
Shifting over, covering
a little more ground.
That business again
about sort of storage
of very abstract new
stuff, symbolic stuff,
into our clanky old
mammalian brains.
The notion of having to mix in
symbolic metaphorical functions
into areas of the brain
that do it very literally.
What comes through with
that is strong support
for the argument of someone like
Haidt, that guy the other day,
arguing that moral reasoning
is mostly after the fact.
It's rationalization
for moral affect.
Mostly what we're having is
an initial moral affective
responses.
And that's built around
the power of, for example,
a symbolic moral failure to
cause the same neurons to get
excited in your brain that would
tell you that you're disgusted
with rotten food, the
visceralness, the sort
of salience of it,
the whole notion
there being in his work
more and more support
for it that an awful lot
of the time moral reasoning
is coming after the moral
decision has been made
along the lines of affect.
And a lot of the brain
imaging work by now
is showing evidence for this.
And again, the strongest
sort of evidence
is when you go through
the list of things,
would you eat your
pet after it died?
Is incest OK if it's
post-reproductive?
And all the ways in which people
say, I can't tell you why,
but it's wrong.
That shouldn't be allowed.
And what that is over
and over in those cases
is a demonstration of the
affective moral decision making
coming before the
moral reasoning.
So really important
feature of his work.
Backfilling on some
neurotransmitter stuff,
neurochemistry.
I managed to completely forget
poor, innocent serotonin coming
into the picture.
What we covered on
Wednesday was dopamine
and the ability of
dopamine to, in effect,
give the frontal
cortex the energy
to do the emotional
regulation stuff.
In effect, if what
the frontal cortex
is saying to all of
the limbic system
on many occasions is,
don't do, it don't do it,
I wouldn't do that
if I were you.
What the dopaminergic
projections
into the frontal
cortex are doing
is telling the frontal cortex,
tell the limbic system not
to do it because it's going to
be amazing if they can hold out
down there.
The dopamine system, in terms
of the anticipation of reward.
Now switching over to
another neurotransmitter
that gets lots of attention
in this business-- serotonin.
Before it's over
with, we are going
to hear about serotonin
in coming weeks having
to do with a bunch of different
psychiatric disorders.
But this is serotonin in some
frontal cortical related areas
of the brain seeming
to have something
to do with aggression
and impulsive behavior.
What's the evidence?
First off, the totally
correlative stuff.
Look at levels of serotonin in
animals, experimental animals,
in these projection areas that
go into the frontal cortex.
Lower levels of serotonin
predicting more impulsive,
more aggressive behavior.
Consistent finding in the field.
Consistent finding when you then
switch over to humans and look
at something that you
cannot do in a human,
not looking at something that
you can't do in a human--
whatever.
You can't look at serotonin
levels and somebody's brain
because you're not going to
slice it out and measure stuff.
What that whole
literature is about
is instead looking at
this synthetic pathway.
How is serotonin broken
down, these two enzymes here.
MOA, monoamine oxidase,
this one broken down
into a waste product called
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid.
Do not write that down.
5-HIAA.
The main point being
that in a human
you can't measure levels
of this very readily.
You measure this in
the blood stream,
in the cerebral spinal fluid,
in the urine, places like that.
And the literature is
showing that lower levels
of serotonin breakdown
products are correlated
in humans with higher levels
of aggression and antisocial
behavior.
You should be able to rip that
one to shreds within seconds.
Number one, this
is just correlative
and you could very easily
imagine horses and carts
getting all confused here.
The second thing
is remember when
you're measuring
neurotransmitter junk
in the bloodstream
or the urine, you're
measuring the junk of all the
gazillion different places
in the brain where
this neurotransmitter
is being used for things have
nothing to do with aspects
of aggression, impulsivity.
It's really hard
to tell anything.
Nonetheless, the
animal literature
has been pretty
consistent with this.
So back to correlation.
Which is causing which,
which is causing which?
Then you could do
the animal studies
showing that when you manipulate
serotonin levels in something
like a rat or a
primate, drive down
serotonin levels in the
frontal cortical region
and you get more
aggressive behavior.
You get more impulsivity.
So evidence for that there
actually being causal.
Something similar
or a building block
of that, studies that
have been done in humans.
You don't slice
somebody's head open
and measure their
serotonin levels,
but instead in
this case you give
a drug which, for a short
period, will mimic serotonin.
and It will mimic serotonin
in the way serotonin
interacts with the receptors
in the frontal cortex,
your buzzing serotonin pathways.
In those individuals in
the frontal cortex what do
you wind up seeing?
Increased metabolism
in the frontal cortex.
Serotonin stimulates
frontal metabolism
except in individuals with a
history of antisocial violence.
What's that
beginning to suggest?
Part of what serotonin is doing
is joining in with dopamine
to stimulate the
frontal cortex, get
the I wouldn't do that if I
were you really, really, hold on
don't do it, pathways
down to the limbic system.
And part of the
evidence we're seeing,
violent sociopaths having lower
than normal metabolic rates
in the frontal cortex.
Some of these pieces
beginning to come together.
So a lot is relevant in
terms of levels of this.
Immediately one
starts thinking genes.
Genes related to the various
types of serotonin receptors.
Genes related to the
enzymes that make
serotonin, that break it down.
And there's a literature
that's emerging on that one.
First off, it is a really tough
literature to make sense of.
As follows, suppose
you are studying
some population of people
who are very aggressive
and you're measuring
this breakdown
product in their bloodstream
and you see there's
very low levels in the stuff.
OK.
So how do you interpret that if?
You believe that low
levels of serotonin
give rise to aggression.
So what's your interpretation?
Low levels of this,
because you're not
making much serotonin.
If you're not making
much serotonin,
you're not getting much
serotonin breakdown product,
support for the idea
that aggression is
caused by too little serotonin.
Suppose instead you like the
idea of too much serotonin
causing aggression.
What would you then say?
Well, suppose there
is a mutation in one
of these enzymes that's supposed
to break down serotonin.
And because of the
mutation, it doesn't.
What's going to happen?
Serotonin doesn't get broken
down, it's levels build up,
and thus you'll see
low levels of that.
In other words, the
same exact finding
can tell either elevated or
lower than normal levels.
Completely uninterpretable
when you're
trying to make sense
of what's happening
in an organism like a human
where you can't actually
measure at this step.
So there could be low
levels because there
is low levels of everything.
Or there could be
low levels because,
thanks to a blockade here, the
levels of this are building up.
Totally impossible to
separate those out.
In some of the
studies in the field
have really strongly voted
for one type of conclusion
based on human studies
measuring that stuff
where it simply can't be done.
How about the genetics, though?
What you see are differences
in variance of the gene.
That's the critical one
for making serotonin.
Basically concept, if
you're not a bio chem type,
if there is a couple of steps
needed to make something
and one step is really,
really important,
basically like if
this first step
occurs you're guaranteed
that the second one will.
And the first step is the
one that's a little bit iffy.
That would be referred
to as the rate limiting
step in the pathway.
The rate limiting enzyme, this
enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase,
is the rate limiting step in
the synthesis of serotonin.
And by now, there is a
literature showing variance
on tryptophan
hydroxylase in people.
Variance in non-human
primates that
begin to correlate a bit
with how much of this,
how much of aggression.
Not big effects.
Back to our statistics lecture,
the findings are there.
They're not big effects, though.
Meanwhile, at the
other end, people
have been looking at genetic
variants on these guys
and that literature is
coming through also.
Different variants
that appear to have
different levels of
activity correlated
with different levels of
aggression, different levels
of breakdown products.
So that's out there as well.
But immediately we've got
something going straight back
to four different earlier
lectures, the point being made
over and over, scale graph
by now where exactly where
this one is heading-- if
I can get the right ink--
which is-- OK.
So variants on this MAO
gene, this monoamine oxidase.
It comes in two
different flavors.
And what you've got is in
terms of how they function.
One of them should
be predisposing
towards more serotonin
signaling than the other.
And thus you would predict that
the one that predisposes you
towards less serotonin
signaling in the frontal cortex
should be associated with
higher levels of aggression.
And thus we go back to that same
exact study, that same group
that did the study
looking at the interaction
between depression, serotonin
transporter gene, all of that,
looking at those data.
Now what they were asking
was by age 25 or so
what was the incidence of
antisocial violent behavior
in this population
of 17,000 kids
and what does that have to
do with which variant of MAO
they had?
And it's the exact
same punchline by now.
This is the depression
gene environment, stress,
figurative,
superimposable with this.
It's the exact same punchline.
Having the bad version
of monoamine oxidase gene
does not increase your risk of
antisocial violent behavior.
Having the bad
version of the gene
and getting brought up in an
environment with abuse vastly
increased likelihood.
And what they showed in
there was the number of times
of major physical
abuse during childhood,
the more that was
the case, the more
there was an interaction here.
Having the good
version growing up
in a more abusive
setting, yes, it
increases the odds of
antisocial behavior.
Not a big effect, though.
What do we got here?
Yet another gene
environment interaction.
By now you should be
utterly unwilling to say
whether any gene
does anything here
outside the context of saying,
in what sort of setting,
with what sort of background?
Huge interaction here.
So giving a sense here of where
serotonin is fitting into it.
Next piece of neurochemistry
that's relevany-- and this
is not a
neurotransmitter, but this
is a nuerochemical
that occasionally
gets put into the nervous
system, which is alcohol.
Alcohol.
What doe alcohol do
first to neurons on sort
of the nuts and bolts level?
Is alcohol a mimicker of any
particular neurotransmitter?
No.
Does alcohol bind to
any particular class
of neurotransmitter receptor?
No, not that either.
Alcohol seems to have some
remarkably nonspecific effects
in terms of how cells function.
All one could say at
this point is alcohol
is not equal to--
it's kind of working
like this neurotransmitter
or that enzyme
or that-- it's not that clean.
It is a messy drug with lots
of effects in the brain.
So what does alcohol have
to do with aggression?
Everybody knows
the answer to that,
which is alcohol increases
levels of aggression.
Everybody knows this.
Everybody knows
this and the guy who
gets a couple of
drinks under his built
and is flinging people out
the bar soon afterward.
Alcohol increases aggression.
What you find, in fact, is there
is no significant relationship
between the two.
A huge literature
examining this by now.
And what you see instead is
one of our if then contingent
themes here.
Over and over you're getting
this sort of thing coming up.
Alcohol does not cause
people to be aggressive.
Alcohol causes
people who already
are aggressive to
become more aggressive.
Alcohol causes people who
are unaggressive to become
more inhibited.
What alcohol does
is merely magnify
the preexisting
social tendencies.
This theme over and over again.
That's exactly what testosterone
was doing two days ago.
Testosterone does not make
number three ranking rhesus
monkeys start attacking
number two and number one.
It makes them absolutely
torture numbers four and five.
Testosterone does not
create aggression.
It amplifies preexisting social
patterns [INAUDIBLE] that's
our remove the testosterone
and aggression doesn't go down
to 0%.
Interaction with social
history, same exact theme again.
Alcohol does not
cause aggression.
It amplifies
aggressiveness in people
who already are aggressive.
Along with that, sort of
as a confounding factor,
we have this problem that
everybody knows that alcohol
makes you more aggressive.
And what has also
been shown in studies
is that if you tell
people that you have just
raised their blood
alcohol levels
infusing in either alcohol
or infusing in saline.
And what you see is
when people believe
their blood alcohol
levels have risen
they become more aggressive.
What is alcohol about?
Alcohol allows you to give
voice to those preexisting
social tendencies
towards aggression.
Modifier over and over
again this sort of theme.
And this has been studied
in all sorts of contexts.
One really interesting
domain have
been people who--
anthropologists
who basically study how
people in different cultures
learn to get drunk.
That's kind of interesting.
That must be an interesting
thing to spend your career on.
What is this about?
Looking at-- one of the
people who does this work,
looking at this whole issue
of populations that did not
have a prior history
of heavy alcohol
use before some explicit
transitional event.
And what that usually
translates that into
is Polynesian
islands that did not
have much alcohol before
they were touched by the West
during World War II with alcohol
brought in heavily after that.
So the question becomes,
what are people's behaviors
like in these cultures
as they are first
having a culture of
people drinking to excess?
And the answer is, it depends.
It depends on the people who
are teaching you to drink.
And what you see
is an interaction
between the type
of colonial power
that controlled the island at
the time and what people did.
And you would see in
British controlled islands,
American controlled
islands, people
would start
realizing that you're
supposed to be aggressive and
become more violent when you're
drunk.
Meanwhile, over in like French
Tahiti, people get drunk
and they all sleep
with each other.
Aha.
[LAUGHTER]
It's a cultural context
specific sort of thing.
This shown over and over again.
So a little bit on the
neurochemistry here.
We then began
working our way left,
looking first at
hormonal regulation,
the short-term hormonal effects.
Looking at testosterone.
Let's also briefly
go to the other side
around that time point, the
acute environmental releasers.
Aggression as our
fixed action pattern.
What are some of the releasing
stimuli for aggression?
Some of the most reliable ones
are ones that always, always
demand you to interview an
animal in the same language
across different species Just as
with sexual behavior releasing
stimuli, some species become
aggressive in response
to smells, to sounds, to sights,
to our whole array with this.
Here's one version.
Here's a species of ant that
gets aggressive in response
to vibration.
And these are ants
living in East Africa
that have a symbiotic
relationship with trees there
acacia trees.
And what happens is the acacia
trees grow these little sort
of igloo bubbly spheroid
things on their branches, which
have holes in them and
which provide perfect living
environments for the ants.
So acacia trees are
giving ants a home.
And what the ants do in return
is they protect the acacia tree
from herbivores.
Herbivores eating their leaves.
What happens?
Along comes a giraffe
and begins to chew
and it breaks a branch
and the vibration
causes all of these
ants to come pouring out
and bite the giraffe's lips.
At which point the giraffe
goes to a different tree.
So we see in that case,
what's the releasing stimulus?
Go and shake a branch
and you suddenly
have 4,000 ants angry at you.
All these deals again and
again, interviewing an animal
in its own language.
So what are some of the reliable
releasing stimuli in humans?
Same theme as with
the sexual behavior.
We don't have any auditory
stimuli that automatically
trigger aggression.
We don't have any
olfactory ones.
We don't have any-- we've
got some subliminal ones.
Remember that study
mentioned a few weeks back.
Take sweat from someone
who is frightened
as opposed to the
same amount of sweat
from someone who's been
happily exercising.
That was the deal of swabbing
the arm pits of people
jumping out of airplanes.
Take sweat from someone
who is frightened
and subliminal exposure to
it, the amygdala activates.
So we're not completely
free of sensory stuff,
but we're not triggered in
any sort of way that's as
dramatic as in other species.
So what sort of multi-sensory,
multi-modal sort of things
trigger aggression?
Number one, most
reliable one, is pain.
Make an organism feel
pained and you have greatly
increased its likelihood of
turning around and biting
the closest thing to it.
So pain as a trigger for it.
Frustration as a trigger.
Take a rat.
Train it to press a lever
10 times, it gets its food.
10 times, get its food.
10 times, it doesn't
get its food.
10 times, you're not
giving it its food.
Get the rat good and frustrated.
And with great
reliability if there
is another rat
sitting there, it's
going to spin
around and bite it.
So displacement aggression,
being driven there
by frustration, by pain,
things of that sort.
And what's really depressing is
if you were a rat or a primate
and you were sitting there
being frustrated by not getting
a reward and your
glucocorticoid levels
have risen, go and
bite somebody else
and your glucocorticoid
levels will go down.
And there we describe a
very depressing feature
about our social world.
Displacing aggression
on somebody else
in species after species
is stress reducing.
So triggers.
Triggers for that.
Great example of this
and a remarkable one,
back to that business
from a couple of weeks
ago, that alternative mating
strategy of orangutan males.
That business that
after hearing all
that heartwarming alternative
strategy stuff of male
baboons forming
friendships with females.
Meanwhile, the alternative
strategy with a orangutan
males being something
that absolutely fits
all the definitions of rape.
Well, do you see
anything like that
in some other primate species?
And you see it every now
and then among male baboons.
Again, defined as
forced sex with a female
who actively
attempts to get away
and actively attempts to resist.
What you see under
that sort of definition
is every now and then it
will happen in baboons.
What is the circumstance?
I've seen it three
times over the years.
Other people have seen
it occasionally as well.
It's always the exact
same circumstance.
It is the number one male
on the day or the day
after that he has
just been dumped out
of his alpha position.
And most of the time the animal
goes and mopes somewhere else.
Most of the time the
animal mopes and then
finds somebody
smaller to beat up on.
The only times I've seen this
over all these years, that
was exactly the circumstance.
Frustration, aggression
displacement.
Very, very familiar.
When we get to some more
environmental factors later on,
some of the big ones, what we
will deal with in this context
is the relationship
between why is it
that when the economy gets
bad, violence goes up.
Why does poverty breed violence?
And this is
consistently the case.
Why is that occurring?
Some framing theoretically
within the context
of frustration and
pain and stress
are really reliable predictors
of aggressive behavior.
But again, it's the same
theme as with alcohol.
Pain makes organisms
that are already
predisposed towards being
aggressive more aggressive.
It does not do so
uniformly across the board.
Frustration, the
same exact thing.
Once again, we have something
modulating, amplifying,
blunting, damping, all
this sort of theme again
and again, some
other factor there.
Another example of this.
Another environmental
trigger-- and study
this subject somewhere in the
1950s or so and the top thing
that you would get
on the list in terms
of environmental
releasers for aggression
would be overcrowding.
This was a whole literature
that emerged at the time.
A psychologist named
Calhoun, John Calhoun,
started this whole field.
And what he would do
was take a bunch of rats
living in an enclosure
of a certain size
and go about observing them.
And they're going about
their rat business.
And now put all of them
into a much smaller space,
a higher density, crowd them.
And what he reported
was aggression explodes
at that point.
Aggression goes
through the roof.
Crowding causing aggression.
The two factoids,
or rather the one
factoid that everybody
learned from that literature
for decades afterward from
the Scientific American papers
was violence would
go up to the point
that rats would start killing
and cannibalizing each other.
Urban crowding making our next
generation of cannibals, which
is exactly what an awful
lot of sociologists
are off running
with, not to mention
various Southern
senators who talked
about the menace of inner
city population density
and spawning violence because
overcrowding causes aggression.
Whole literature-- and
it took a number of years
until people started
looking a little bit closer
at the animals.
And on the average,
the rate of aggression
does not change with crowding.
You could probably fill in
the next sentence by now.
What you see instead
is animals that
are already aggressive
become more aggressive when
you crowd them.
Animals that are
subordinate and unaggressive
become even more
weak and withdrawn.
What these early generations
of studies were doing wrong
was folks sitting there just
looking for the exciting stuff.
Oh, my God.
We just saw a rat
cannibalize another one.
I sure never saw that
with a big enclosure.
The actual quantitative
rates of aggression
do not go up with crowding.
Aggressive individuals
become more aggressive then.
And we readily can fit
that into scenarios
of frustration, displacement,
and that kind of thing.
Now switching back to where
we started the other day,
back to hormones.
The short-term
hormonal exposure.
And where we had
started with short-term
not the hormonal
exposure back when
you were a fetus, but
in the last minute,
in the last hour, the
last couple of days.
Where we started, of
course, was testosterone.
And to summarize
that again, it is
the same punchline as with
testosterone and sexual
behavior.
Testosterone is required
for the normal range
of aggressive behavior in
every species looked at.
When you castrate males,
levels of aggression go down.
Just as critically levels of
aggression do not go down to 0.
Very critically there, the
more prior social experience
with aggression the more it is
maintained after castration.
Replace the testosterone, 10%
of normal levels, 100%, 200%.
All of them do the
exact same thing.
The brain is sensitive
to testosterone,
but it's not sensitive to
small little differences in it.
So no individual who is more
aggressive than the person
sitting next to
them, there is no way
it can ever be
attributed to differences
in testosterone levels in
the normal healthy range.
Back to the same qualifier
from the sex lectures.
Now take someone who instead of
having 200% the normal levels,
twice the normal levels, they
have tenfold higher levels,
higher than the body
ever normally sees
because they are abusing
anabolic steroids
and their levels of
aggression do indeed go up.
But within the normal
range, you gotta
have testosterone but
it is necessary but not
sufficient for normal levels.
The brain is not sensitive
to small little differences
and it is overwhelmingly
modulatory.
That same business again.
Number three in the
hierarchy stoked
on testosterone attacks
four and five more,
doesn't bother with two and one.
Exaggerating
preexisting tendencies.
Testosterone is
shortening the lag time
between action potentials
in the amygdala
if and only if the
amygdala has gotten excited
and, passing on
aggressive messages,
testosterone amplifies
it, testosterone
not as causing but as
modulating that same theme again
and again.
Finally, towards
the end of that,
we heard about that in amazing
example of hyenas and their sex
reversal system.
One final interesting
feature of it, which is we
live within 30 miles of
the world's only research
colony of hyenas who live
up in the Berkeley hills.
And if the wind
is just right, you
can hear them whooping
in downtown Berkeley
at night on occasion.
And God knows how many religions
that has spawned over there.
[LAUGHTER]
But they've got this
hyena colony there.
And these were hyenas that were
brought over as pups from East
Africa, from Kenya, as part
of studying this weird sex
reversal system.
Hyenas turn out to be
models for a whole bunch
of gynecological
disorders having
to do with the elevated
testosterone levels
in the females.
All of that-- they've now
gone through about 20 years
in generations, but the
very first generation
they had raised
a critical issue.
Back to the other day,
hyenas' social systems,
females are dominant to males.
Females are more
aggressive than males.
Females have higher
testosterone levels.
So the question becomes,
you've got a whole bunch
of hyenas that were brought over
as pups raised without mothers,
raised in something
other than a normal hyena
clan of watching adults.
They're all growing up as pups
together without adult models.
Are females going
to still wind up
being more aggressive
than males?
And what they saw
was, yes, indeed.
Females had the same normal
higher testosterone levels
as you would find in wild
hyenas, the same weirdo
genitals, all of that.
And females were
socially dominant.
Whoa.
Hormones and bizarre
fake scrotums is destiny.
But what they saw was it took
years for the dominant system
to emerge with the
females dominating.
It took far longer.
What's that telling us about
normal hyenas out there?
It's a mixture of you
having lots of testosterone
on board and its
physiological consequences
and you getting to
watch Mom terrorizing
the males in the neighborhood.
So once again, a combination
between social factors,
endocrine modulators.
They eventually got to a classic
female dominated social system.
It took them a
lot longer though.
Next hormone, hormones to look
at, estrogen, progesterone.
Back to, no, we're not
going to look at that yet.
Hold on.
Stop.
All of you.
Next what we look at are
testosterone levels in females.
Oh, yes.
That again.
Same exact thing as
from the sex lecture,
substituted from there.
Females generates certain
levels of testosterone
of related androgens
from the adrenal gland,
adrenal androgens, maybe 5%
the levels you see in males.
And what we saw
last week is female
proceptive sexual behavior
is dependent on testosterone.
Same exact deal.
Take out the
adrenals of a woman,
testosterone levels
drop down to 0
at that point and levels of
sexual libido, proceptivity,
go down.
Not all the way down.
Depends on how much prior
social experience, same song
and dance.
And same song and dance here.
Aggression.
Aggression in females
of various species
is amplified by the
adrenal androgrens.
Those low levels castrate.
Goes down.
Not all the way down.
Same exact deal again.
It is modulatory in females
as well as in males.
Now leaping to estrogen
and progesterone.
What's up with them in
terms of aggression?
And we had first hints of it
from the very first lecture,
that business that a
disproportionate share
of female violence is
carried out by women
in their perimenstrual period.
The whole notion of
perimenstrual syndrome
increasing aggression.
This has been around
for a long time
and this holds up in
some criminology studies,
though what you see
here, of course,
is a gazillion different
ways of interpreting it.
First possible interpretation.
All we're looking
at here is culture.
Culture that decides
that menstruation
is a state that you are
unhygienic and need to be
separated from everybody else.
And great novels about
red tents and sort
of cultural values on it.
So, of course, behavior
changes dramatically
at that time with a
peripheralization,
a stigmatization in culture
after culture blah, blah.
Cross-cultural argument.
Then there's a personality
argument that a lot of people
do.
Looking at the literature,
the relationship between
increased aggressiveness around
the perimenstrual period.
Again, notice I'm not
saying pre-menstrual.
What the literature
shows is a couple
of days after just as much
as a couple of days before.
So perimenstrual.
Personality differences
explaining that.
Then there are the marvelous
psychodynamic psychoanalysts
who've been let loose
at that for years.
And what they come
up with-- this
is one of the great
ridiculous sound bytes.
That aggression goes up and
women around the time they
are menstruating
because this evidence
that they are fertile but
have gone another cycle
without getting pregnant
throws them into the conflict--
the conflict between-- get this.
This could go on like
a doily in the kitchen.
The conflict between being
productive and reproductive.
Oh, should I function in society
or should I be off having
babies like female hyenas?
And, oh, that's what it's about.
It's the deep psychoanalytic
conflict and evidence
that yet again you have
passed up the chance
to be a mother and
reproductive so you're
going to be in a pissy mood.
[LAUGHTER]
So that's a more
psychodynamic theory.
And that one has been around
in the literature forever.
But back to the biological one.
Biological one.
So what sort of evidence
is it for for that?
So what we got here?
Let's switch from our
deal from previously.
So now we've got
menstruation, day 28 coming
right in the middle there.
And let us look at this record.
Here is a female, someone
who you've been observing.
And you've been observing, in
fact, for a couple of years.
And you keep track of any time
they do something aggressive.
And what you see after you've
got 20 cycles worth of data
is the likelihood of it
occurring does something
like that.
That's the perimenstrual
irritability.
That's a disproportionate
share of women
in prison for violent acts.
That's all of that.
So what do you make
of it when told
that this is precisely
the profile you
see in a female baboon?
Well, she's probably
not getting bummed out
every time she menstruates
and wonders whether she really
should be holding
off having babies
until she gets to be a
partner in the law firm.
What you see there is none
of the cultural stuff,
none of the
pyschodynamic, and none
of the psychosomatic stuff.
Another realm of explanation.
You see something close
to the same exact thing
in female baboons.
So that, and for
my money, argues
that there is some major biology
going on there amid possibly
relevant cultural factors.
Possibly relevant in
terms of there always
being an argument in a certain
school of anthropologists
for some decades
that you don't see
perimenstrual shifts
in behavior in cultures
that are more free about bodies
and more sexually uninhibited.
And presumably this
tells you that something
about baboons'
sexual inhibitions,
there's not a whole
lot of evidence
for that perimenstrual
mood shifts is
pretty universal
across human cultures.
And you see the same exact
thing in a female baboon.
So we've got some biology
going on there for my money.
None the less, you
don't have only biology
because there are all sorts
of psychological factors.
One study showing
things, for example,
like if you tell a woman that
she is one day before having
her period.
And I'm not exactly
sure how this one
works, let alone the human
subject's permission.
But this was a study
done some decades ago.
Women become more irritable.
So a self-fulfilling component.
Tell someone that
they are going to have
their period the next day and
their male significant other
becomes more irritable.
[LAUGHTER]
Irritability among men who
have significant others, women,
peaks around the time that
she as menstru-- whoa,
we've got either some sort of
viral, infectious, intersexual
thing happening here or we've
got strong components having
nothing to do with the biology.
This one, in addition,
studies showing that, yes,
there is this mood fluctuation.
On the average there is a
larger fluctuation in mood,
affect, when you compare
weekend versus week
day, in particular Friday,
Saturday versus Monday,
Tuesday.
Bigger fluctuation
than the mood changes
you see typically in
women around the time
of their period.
So we got some biology here,
but nonetheless there's
other stuff going on as well.
So what about the biology?
One thing that
immediately comes up
is this issue that, OK,
perimenstrual periods,
mood shifts there, are not
purely about aggression
and irritability.
They are also about depression
and social withdrawal.
That's the time of
cycle when women
are most likely to have
a depressive episode.
Very, very different
scenario there.
So what's up with that?
You begin to get a hint of
this looking at the baboons.
What you see is
this is the profile
you would see in a high
ranking female baboon.
Look at a low ranking female and
there's no particular change.
Look instead at a
measure of how far
away she stays
from everyone else
and it does something like that.
In other words, if you are
a low ranking female baboon,
you don't have the option to
be irritable to somebody else
and dump on them.
You instead become more socially
withdrawn, do less grooming.
So an interaction between
place and society, all of that.
So the biology now.
Estrogen, progesterone.
Lots of evidence
that their levels
and in particular their
ratio is critical to what
is going on here.
Massive changes in
the levels of both
of these hormones around
the time of one's period.
And does not take a
whole lot for the ratios
thus to become
very, very skewed.
Back to the advanced
endocrinology stuff,
the fact that
parts of your brain
are not just
measuring the levels
of one hormone or another,
but the ratio of the two.
That seems to be pertinent.
What the evidence
suggests is in one subset
of women with severe
perimenstrual syndrome--
and that's about 10%
of the population.
In one subset of those
individuals what seems to be
the problem is too much
of a drop of progesterone
around the time of your period.
So what's the
neurochemistry of that?
Quick memory from
a few weeks ago.
What's one of the unlikely
things that progesterone does?
[INAUDIBLE]
Yeah.
The GABA receptor stuff.
Progesterone-- by way of often
this metabolite, this sort
of breakdown product
of it-- progesterone
being able to bind to
the receptor for GABA
at a minor tranquilizer
binding site
just like where benzodiazepines
like Valium bind to.
Progesterone as
decreasing anxiety,
progesterone as mildly sedative.
That's one of the
interpretations that's
given for what a
more than normally
rapid drop of progesterone
might have to do with PMS.
Another subgroup of
women appear to have
an atypically large
drop in levels
of opioids, endogenous
opioids, around the time here.
Normally there are
levels of beta endorphin,
a neurotransmitter slash
hormone with all sorts
of nice effects on mood
and things of that sort.
And levels tend to go
down around this point.
A subset of women with severe
PMS where the marker there
appears to be a
particularly fast drop
of opioid beta endorphin
levels at the time.
So just the first bits of
hints of the endocrinology
of what that is about.
Final hormones.
Final hormones, glucocorticoids,
epinephrine, norepinephrine,
glucocorticoids,
sympathetic nervous system.
And it's the same exact
deal as two days ago.
Looking at the fact
that those midbrain,
hindbrain areas get activated
during an aggressive act.
Oh, does that teach us
something about aggression?
Not in the slightest.
What you have instead
is the nonspecificity.
Levels of glucocorticoids
will go up roughly equally
whether you were running for
your life or running in rage
or running in joy.
That whole deal again,
sympathetic arousal.
It's nonspecific.
And back to that sound
byte from two days ago,
the opposite of
love is not hate.
The opposite of love
is indifference.
And endocrinologically,
this is the case again.
One interesting piece in the
glucocorticoid and sympathetic
nervous system domain.
Take somebody and poke
their finger with a pin
or make them physically
uncomfortable
or something painful
and they activate
the sympathetic nervous system
as part of their mild stress
response.
The early stages of it.
One class of people where this
doesn't work anywhere near
as much-- sociopaths.
And by now a large literature
showing elevated pain
thresholds in people with
sociopathic violent disorders
of behavior, elevated
pain thresholds
and less sympathetic nervous
system responsiveness to pain.
And you should be able to
go off and running with that
one easily in so far
as metaphorically
what empathy is about, is
feeling somebody else's pain.
If your own pain system is on
the pretty insensitive side,
that is certainly going
to have an impact there.
That's a very
consistent finding.
So what we are ready for
now is switching over
to longer term environmental
ideas about aggression.
Why do I keep pretending
as if the chart is here?
Here.
We've now moved over to here.
Shifting from
environmental triggers--
not something painful
five seconds ago,
not I was expecting you get
this food pellet after pressing
the lever 20 times and I didn't
get the lever, I'm frustrated.
Not a minute's worth of
environmental releasers.
But instead general
pictures of what environment
has to do with aggression.
Some of the broad theories that
have come out over the years.
Let's take a five minute
break before that.
To quickly go through
this deal again.
So you've got amino
acid precursor.
Tryptophan, that's your building
block for making serotonin.
Key enzyme coded for by a gene.
It's a protein.
Key enzyme that turns
it into the first step.
And then this enzyme.
There's always a ton around.
It automatically gets
turned into serotonin.
So now you have serotonin.
Serotonin will do its thing
by way of binding to serotonin
receptors.
And at some point serotonin
tone will be broken down
into this waste product.
So a gene coding
for this protein,
a gene coding for this one,
which we're not interested in.
A bunch of genes coding
for the receptors.
And genes coding for
these two enzymes.
And the whole point
there being that there's
different versions
of these genes
for the synthetic enzymes,
for the degradative enzymes,
for the receptors.
And thus beginning to
look at whether that
predicts differences in
levels of aggressive behavior.
So that's what that was about.
In addition, was just told
a great story about somebody
who was under tremendous
duress to supply
alcohol for her younger
16-year-old sister
and friends at a sweet
16 party and decided,
no way is this happening.
And thus bought a bunch of
bottles of something or other
and took the labels off
and put other labels on.
And before you knew it,
you had a whole bunch
of 16-year-olds
acting just asinine
and claiming to be
drunk beyond words.
And, yes.
Social modulation of.
[LAUGHTER]
Very, very frequently seen.
And hopefully some of you
have taken part in experiments
like that yourselves
over the years
or may foist that one
off on someone else.
So now pushing over toward
some of the broad theories
about environmental
triggers for aggression.
And no surprise, theories
are a dime a dozen.
All sorts of theorists
over the years.
And some of which occasionally
feel obliged to actually go
see if there's
data supporting it.
But what I'll just
touch on briefly
are three very broadly
different schools
of thinking about environmental
factors in aggression.
The first school is one that
says environment is irrelevant.
And you can bet how much
I'm going to like that here
in the coming minutes.
And who was the main
advocate of that?
Our ever reliable friend
Herr Nazi Konrad Lorenz.
Konrad Lorenz, after he had
gotten out of his prison camp
after World War II for
being a Nazi propagandist
and he sort of dusted himself
off and got his ethology
empire going again
and remarkably
was forgiven by the other
elder fathers of ethology,
including Niko Tinbergen,
who spent much of World War
II in a concentration
camp and he
is the one who led
the move to make sure
that Konrad Lorenz was
welcomed back in the community
even though he was an
unrepentant Nazi swine.
But-- so after Konrad
Lorenz came out,
in the early '60s he
wrote a book which
was one of the most influential
anthropology books of all time,
a book called On Aggression.
And that was the coffee
table book for half a decade.
That was the book that people
had book clubs about if they
were intellectuals.
On Aggression had a huge
influence on people's thinking
at the time.
And what was the Lorenz's
basic premise as to
what were the environmental
components of aggression?
What was aggression about?
It was exactly
the book you would
expect to be written
by an unrepentant Nazi.
Because his theme was just
following biological orders.
In Lorenz's view, on his view
as to what aggression is about,
it is inevitable.
There is no environmental
requirement.
Aggression is universal
and inevitable.
Famous quote of his that
he gave, for example,
near his death in the
1970s to Newsweek.
There is no love without hate.
Wow.
He must have been
a great father.
[LAUGHTER]
But what you see is a whole
book, a whole premise,
built on that.
A number of the notions,
the basic themes
that ran through the book.
Number one, aggression
is universal.
It is there in all individuals.
Number two, what he called his
hydraulic model of aggression.
And if this sounds silly,
you should actually
go see the book because he had
actual diagrams of like pseudo
toilet bowl plumbing stuff
telling us how aggression
works as follows.
There is some aggression toilet
bowl water tank which is slowly
filling up with water.
And the deal is that the
higher the levels of water get,
the higher the aggressive
drive, the less
of an environmental trigger it
takes to provoke the aggression
to come out.
The higher the levels,
the more easily
a releasing stimulus
will trigger fixed action
pattern of aggression.
Intrinsic in his model
also and explicitly stated
was eventually his toilet bowl
fills up with enough-- actually
it's not the toilet
bowl, it's the tank.
The tank fills up
with enough water
that it begins to
dribble over the top
and thus you get
spontaneous aggression.
His model was with
the passage of time,
the longer It has been since an
organism has been aggressive,
the less of an
environmental releaser
is needed to provoke
the aggression until it
is ultimately spontaneous.
The third piece of his model
was just like a toilet bowl
again, which is when you have
an aggressive act you've just
emptied out the tank.
You deplete the
aggressive drive.
You deplete it so that
it resets the system,
starting a refractory period.
That aggression
decreases the likelihood
of aggression occurring
immediately afterward.
This was the
Lorentzian model, which
was enormously,
enormously influential
and everybody learned
about this in Intro Anthro
through the 1960s. '60s
And it would take you
about two seconds
to shred this one.
How many of you have
ever murdered anyone?
You never know.
People are kind of drowsy,
checking their emails
and suddenly confess.
How many of you plan
to murder somebody?
Yes, we are like the most
dangerous aggressively species
on this planet and the
vast majority of us
will never have a physical
fight with somebody
since we left
seventh grade or so.
Aggression is not universal.
Aggression is not inevitable.
And aggression is not sublimated
into psychological processes,
which thus can pass as
support for this model.
The final thing that
does it in is aggression
is not self-depleting.
Aggression is self-reinforcing.
And all you have to do
is look at the crowd
contagion, the
emotional contagion,
that occurs in soccer stadiums
when people start fighting.
Crowd violence, all of that.
Aggression is not self-depleting
and resetting the clock.
Aggression stimulates
more aggression.
Aggression legitimatizes it.
It habituates you to it it.
Is not fitting
Lorenz's model at all.
Meanwhile, on the
other end of the block,
was a very, very
different sort of view.
And this is one that permeates
a lot of thinking in the field.
And this is one built
around the notion
that aggression is ultimately
all about frustration.
It is about frustration,
pain, stress, fear, anxiety.
And this was a view
very heavily pushed
by Soviet researchers in the
period of the Soviet Union.
A very Marxist view
because essentially
what you conclude at
the end is this theme
I keep bringing up
every time pointing out
that the amygdala has something
to do with both aggression
and fear.
That in a world in which
no amygdaloid neuron
need have an action
potential out of fear,
there's not going
to be aggression.
So this is the extreme version
of the frustration displacement
model.
And what is emphasized
in that is a lot of data.
You look at, for example, when
levels of unemployment go up,
levels of spousal abuse go up,
levels of child abuse go up.
When the economy gets
bad, the same exact thing.
Laboratory animals.
Shock a rat, it will bite
the one sitting next to it.
All of these versions of
displacement aggression.
In a baboon troop, for example,
almost 50% of aggression
is displacement aggression
after somebody loses a fight
or loses access to a resource.
Almost certainly this
begins to explain
two really, really depressing
things about unequal societies.
First one being that the
poorer you are, the more likely
you are to be violent,
the more likely
you are to commit some
sort of criminal violence.
And when the economy gets bad,
the rates of that get worse.
It gets more skewed.
And the other ironic
piece of all of that
is that when crime goes up in
lower socioeconomic strata,
overwhelmingly it is crime
turned on the other poor.
When crime goes
up during periods
of frustration and mistreatment
of lower socioeconomic classes,
it does not take the form
of suddenly everybody going
and deciding to like scale
the wall to the palace there
and rip off some
of the Ming vases.
It is victimizing the
people who are victims
right next door to you.
During times of
economic downturns,
the rates of crime in
poorer neighborhoods go up
and it's almost always
turned on individuals
in the neighborhood.
So that supports
this picture as well.
One interesting thing that
argues against frustration
displacement models.
And this is looking at animals.
And looking at what happens
to levels of aggression
during periods of famine.
And this has been studied in a
surprising number of species.
And what you've got are two
very opposing predictions.
First one is if what aggression
is about is built out
of frustration, need pain, fear,
hunger, things of that sort,
the prediction would be when you
look at populations of animals
during periods of
famine, aggression
should go up over
food resources.
And this comes
with the qualifier
that these studies have
to be during a period when
animals are having
to work harder
to get the normal
amounts of food
rather than that they are
being calorically deprived
because obviously behavior
is going to be changed then.
So frustration
displacement model
predicts that during
periods of famine,
aggression goes up
in social species.
A very different model would
predict exactly the opposite.
And what the bulk of
the literature has shown
is during periods of famine in
wild animals in social groups,
aggression tends to go
down rather than up.
So at least in that
realm that tends
to be a vote against one
particular type of frustration
displacement aggression.
It tends to go down.
And in fact, the term has
been given for that by people
who think about these things.
It's referred to
as behavioral fat.
Why does aggression go up, for
example, among young male lions
not during the periods of
the year when there is not
much food but during the peak
of, say, zebra migration?
What's going on there?
You've got a lion.
It's sitting there
saying, I'm not hungry.
My stomach is full.
There's nobody to hunt.
Nobody's going to mate
with me right now,
so I might as well go get
in a fight with somebody.
And in that scenario
what aggression is about
is use of surplus resources
when there is an excess.
It is behavioral fat.
And in lots of species
you see aggression
as a model of behavioral
fat rather than
purely resource deprivation.
One interesting
interpretation that I've
seen of one type of
violence, which is the notion
that violence,
aggression, competition,
being built around limited
resources, a very interesting
interpretation of clan violence,
of feuds, of vendettas,
of retributive violence, which
has been a large percentage
of violence over the centuries.
A way to formalize
that is to think
that these are two
different clans at war
with each other competing
for a very, very
singular resource,
the one who does
the last bit of retribution.
That's what they're
competing for.
So an interesting
interpretation there.
Third broad branch
of people thinking
about theorizing about
aggression-- and these are,
of course, our behaviorists.
Back to the Watson and
Skinner and give me
a child of any
background and let
me control rewards and positive
reinforcement and punishments
and negative
reinforcement, all of that,
and I will be able to regulate
any aspect of behavior.
We know that whole
approach by now.
We saw all the
ways in which that
fails in explaining classical
ethologically based behavior.
But in the standard behaviorist
view have enough opportunities
for punishment and you can
shape, you can condition away,
you can eliminate
aggressive behavior.
And all you need to do
is think for two seconds
and see that that is very
limited in its applicability.
Nicely, huge number
of experiments
have been going on for two
centuries in this country
looking at that, which is
looking at rates of crime
as levels of punishment, the
length of jail sentences,
the likelihood of
being caught, things
like that as the
punishment likelihood
and severity changes, does that
change the likelihood of crime?
Most studied is the very
specific question of,
does the death penalty
decrease the amount of murders?
As different states have
eliminated the death penalty,
as they've reinstated
it, things of that sort,
does changing your behaviorist
realm of punishment
that you could get
for killing someone,
does that decrease the
incidence of murders?
And what you wind up seeing
is in some cases, yes.
Absolutely.
When you are looking
at murders that
involve premeditated violence.
When it is someone
who is sitting there
for months planning
how to do this,
when somebody who is
hired to kill somebody.
Things of that sort.
When it is planned in advance,
increased the likelihood
of death penalty does indeed
decrease the likelihood
of premeditated murder.
However, it does not touch for a
second impulsive murder, crimes
of passion, things of that sort.
And that makes perfect sense.
There is no person who has
just been insulted in a bar
and pulls out a gun
who stops for a second
and thinks, wait a second.
Did the state legislature
pass that new law last week?
Let me think about it.
They don't think about that
because they don't think.
And the majority of violence in
that realm is unpremeditated.
Mostly what the
studies have shown
is changing the
severity of punishment
for murder does not particularly
change the murder rates.
So these broad different
sorts of views-- aggression
as inevitable, biologically
inevitable, all environment can
do is shape the frequency a bit.
Aggression as solely a product
of fear, frustration, anxiety,
resource deprivation.
Aggression solely as
a set of behaviors
that could be shaped by
reward and punishment
to the point of going away.
What do you actually
see when you
see some aspects of
environmental impacts
on aggression?
Particularly early in life.
What do you wind
up seeing in terms
of learning to be aggressive?
The theme that comes
through over and over again,
as I've referred
to, is the notion
that a lot of what early
experience is about
is not learning how
to be aggressive,
but learning when
to be aggressive.
The appropriate context for it.
Whoa.
My page has disappeared.
No wonder it seemed
to have just jumped.
Let's just do that
for a moment here.
Oh, that's what we're
talking about next.
So let's get rid of that.
So what that ushers
us into, I say,
trying to make it seem as if
that's a seamless transition--
what, OK.
Let's all sing for
a couple of minutes
here while I look at
this piece of paper.
[LAUGHTER]
So what this now
brings up is, what
does early experience--
in terms of environment,
in terms of upbringing--
what does that
have to do with aggressive
behavior, empathy, compassion,
all the things we
are looking at here?
Because never more
than during development
do these themes of is
aggression inevitable,
is aggression purely
about social learning,
about displacement--
never more is it clearer in
terms of the consequences
than during early development.
So what's the transition
during development
towards the development
of aggression,
the development of
empathy, the development
of compassionate
behavior, cooperation?
All of that.
Widely, widely studied.
Tons of research that's
been done in this area.
Much of it ultimately
framed along the lines of,
what is the development
of moral standards?
Moral development in kids.
But what's pertinent
comes long before that.
Very early in life the most
pertinent initial transition
is when kids start
distinguishing
between animate and
inanimate objects.
And that comes remarkably
early during the first few days
to weeks of life.
That's a very early transition.
And as I think we have
heard already, what you see
is this specialized
region of the brain,
the fusiform cortex
that responds to faces,
and the fact that autistic
individuals, that part
of their brains do not respond
to faces as in everybody else,
not necessarily distinguishing
between animate and inanimate.
So initial stage,
first beginning
to get that dichotomy down.
What then emerges is
the first evidence
of kids beginning to
differentiate themselves
from the world around
them, beginning
to get a sense of self.
And this is where
kids begin to get
ego boundaries of some sort.
Before that happens,
a kid very typically
views themselves as basically
being continuous with mom.
And this is the world where
you see a 12-month-old where
mom has a cut on her finger
and has been walking around
with a Band-Aid and the
kid is there all day
saying that they have
an owie on their finger.
Because they are
mom, mom is them.
There is no particular
boundary between them.
Around a year of age
is when you begin
to see this starting to happen.
So a sense of self.
What that, of course, has
to be a precursor for it
a sense of others being
selves, theory of mind.
So we've already heard
the building blocks
of theory of mind.
When do kids first
begin to recognize
that not only are they
a distinct individual,
but there are other individuals
with different information,
with different
thoughts, ultimately
with different feelings?
And when does that
begin to emerge?
Typically between
age of three to five.
And we've already heard some
of the basic sort of tests
that are done to reveal that.
And what you also see
is it is very, very
emotionally contingent.
Take a kid who is doing
great theory of mind when
you read them some abstract
story about Sally Mae
or, who is it?
Sarah Ann?
Sally.
Sally Ann?
OK, I seem to not be able
to get this one down.
That kid with the doll there.
Read them and they
may be at a point
where they are three, six months
into being able to perfectly do
tests like that.
But get them in an emotional
aroused circumstance
where it's something
they really care about as
opposed to like some story
there and the theory of mind
goes down the tubes
at that point.
It is not an all
or none transition.
It is one that is
vulnerable, potentially,
to strong emotions.
Go figure, not surprising.
So what a lot of people
have thought about is,
is theory of mind a
prerequisite for empathy?
Is it possible to feel
somebody else's pain
and act upon it
without having a sense
that there is a
somebody else who has
different thoughts
and, most importantly,
different feelings?
And they can be bad feelings,
things of that sort.
Is theory of mind a
prerequisite for empathy?
And the general sense among
a lot of people in the field
is, yes, indeed.
It is necessary
but not sufficient.
And where you see the
most dramatic dissociation
between theory of
mind and empathy
is when you look at sociopaths.
Every sort of test
that could be done,
sociopaths have spectacular
theories of mind.
They are incredibly good
at manipulating people.
And manipulation requires
a very, very astute theory
of mind to be able to do that.
Sociopaths have the
prerequisite of theory of mind
that most people think
that empathy requires.
But what you have there
is it stops at that point.
It does not continue.
It is a means for exploitation
rather than the transition
into true empathy.
As we've already heard,
there is evidence
for empathy like of that sort
and theory of mind in apes,
so we're not the only ones.
So general view being
that you don't get empathy
until you get theory of mind.
But there's always been
this confusing sort
of counter bit of evidence
where you see stuff
like the world of a
15-month-old where somebody
is sitting in the room crying.
And often in experiments
someone who is pretending to.
And the 15-month-old
will come up
and try to give the
paci to the person
and try to put it
in their mouth.
Here, feel better.
So possible
interpretations, number one
being that this is already
evidence of empathy.
Empathy not yet having the
theory of mind element of not
only recognizing there's
somebody else, but not
everybody likes
pacies, especially mine
that I've been slobbering on.
Other interpretation, an
irritation decreasing strategy,
which is it's simply
distressing having the person
in there acting all upset.
And what's going to
make them shut up?
I know, I'm going to go over
to them and give them my stuffy
and maybe that will work.
It is not empathy.
It is attempts to get away
from this irritating context.
Studies very interestingly,
though, arguing against that.
Take kids during their first
three to six months of life
and show them a scenario where
two people are interacting.
One of them needs help
and the other helps them.
Or one of them needs help
and the other doesn't.
Or one of them has
something and the other one
takes the thing away from them.
So either pro-social
behavior, neutral,
or anti-social behavior.
And kids in that
age range already
prefer to look at the
individual who's doing
the pro-social helpful thing.
So some sort of elements of
this are already in there
before formal theory of mind.
None the less, that seems to
be a big important part of it.
Next, so you got
yourself theory of mind
and the next step in there
is not only recognition
that somebody else
has other thoughts
but they have other feelings.
They can be very
different from yours.
They can be legitimate.
And what we begin to enter
now is the more formal world
of moral development in kids.
And the name, the-- without
question-- the most influential
psychologist in this whole
field, one of the biggest
names in the whole field
in the last century,
this guy Lawrence Kohlberg.
And Kohlberg's famed stages
of moral development in kids.
How many of you are
familiar with Kohlberg?
How many are not?
Good.
Kohlberg is.
So Kohlberg.
Lawrence Kohlberg was a
psychologist at Harvard,
super influential.
And he came out of
tradition established
by the Swiss psychologist.
It's never possible to
just say the psychologist.
You always have to see the
Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget.
And Piaget brought
in the whole notion
of sequences of development,
sequences as in kids
crawl before they walk.
Kids comprehend language before
they begin to produce it.
And Piaget generated a
whole world of information
about stages of
cognitive development.
At what age do kids
have object permanence?
You cover something, is
the object still existing
or do you get all surprised
when you take the lid off
and it's still there and
start breathing faster?
Stages of cognitive maturation.
And Kohlberg came
out of that tradition
looking instead at
sequential development
of moral development.
The theme that ran through
this whole sort of world
of sequential
whatevers is that you
don't have the sequence change.
There are no kids ever who
run before they're crawling.
There are no kids who are
fluidly producing language
before they comprehend it.
It's a set sequence.
What does experience do?
It regulates the rate,
the speed with which
you make the transitions.
So Kohlberg introduced
the whole notion
that there are also sequences
of moral development.
Very broadly what
he came up with
were six different categories,
six different steps.
And people, I take it, have
been spending the rest of time
deciding whether there is,
in fact, 60 sub parts of that
and splitting and
lumping all of that.
Broadly these six stages
fall into three categories,
what he called preconventional
moral reasoning,
conventional moral reasoning,
and post-conventional moral
reasoning.
You might have guessed that
after the pre in conventional,
but those were the three phases.
And broadly they could
be termed or framed
in terms of what the motivation
is for acting morally.
In the preconventional stage,
why do you act morally?
Because you may get caught.
Because you may get punished.
Because if you act morally,
maybe you'll get a reward.
What's in it for me?
A very ego centered set of
motivations for moral behavior.
Then transitioning into
the conventional stage.
How that is typically
framed as is
your motivations for
your moral behavior
are based on shared group
values, shared group
conventions.
Things built around
social norms.
Rules, laws, even a
higher level of belief
in the importance
of law and order
in a society transcending
any given law,
a notion that if you
follow conventional rules
of moral reasoning you will
be viewed by society at large
as a good girl, as a good boy
at whatever developmental stage.
Your moral reasoning being
built around society-wide rules
and implications.
Finally, the
post-conventional stage
is built around
transcending that.
The word transcendence
plays a lot
in that realm of
Kohlberg's thinking.
The notion that there
are all sorts of examples
of moral reasoning, moral
decision making, where
you are, in fact, violating
the rules of society.
You are breaking a law.
You are breaking a social norm.
What's the motivation there?
The notion that
there are things that
are more important than
the laws of society.
There are things that are
more important than what
everybody else thinks.
What this has because it is the
world of civil disobedience.
This is the world of saying,
bad laws need to be broken.
This is the world
of people saying,
I don't care if I get punished.
I don't care what
everybody else is doing.
This is the right thing to do.
That would be a
post-conventional Kohlberg
stage.
The main thinking that
goes into sort of Kohlberg
then looking at
adult moral reasoning
is as you go through the various
steps and these sub steps
and all sorts of tests that
ostensibly sort of tapped
into it, not everybody
reaches the same Kohlberg
stage in adulthood.
People will stop in
their conventional stage.
Some people will get to a
partial post-conventional
stage.
The way of thinking of
people within this framework
is, how far do you progress
in your cold Kohlbergian
sort of ladder of
complexity, sophistication,
in your moral reasoning?
Ways in which this would look.
Take somebody and you can
have a Kohlberg stage of being
very focused on the individual.
Sort of studies
that will be done.
You have a kid who believes
there is a baseball team.
And they're told that
here's a bunch of kids.
There's one more spot
left on the baseball team.
And this has always been
a team for boys and boys
play baseball better than girls.
This was the sort of
way this type of study
was done some decades ago.
And here's a girl.
Typically we don't
allow girls on the team.
But this one girl wants to play.
And what you see is at a
preconventional stage what kids
are most likely to do is
reason morally on the level
of individual consequences.
Saying things like, well, she
hasn't gotten to play before.
All of these boys have
gotten to play before.
She's never gotten
to play before.
It would be fair.
She's the one who
should get to play.
By the time you get
to kids reaching
conventional moral
reasoning stages, what
they're doing instead is
saying, well, boys are better.
We need to put one of the
boys on because the team will
be more successful.
Suddenly moving from the level
of individual consequences
to norms and law and order
and things of that sort.
So the general
framework of Kohlberg.
And amid that becoming
the dominating model.
There has been a gazillion
totally appropriate criticisms
of it.
One is focusing right off the
bat on gender and the fact
that Kohlberg, doing his
stuff mostly in the 1960s,
had the same biases as most
everyone of the time, which
was a very disproportionate
share of the studies
were done on males
rather than females.
The notion that Kohlbergian
reasoning sequences
of moral development are
a better fit for what
happens in boys and men
than in women, girls.
That boys are more about
justice girls are more about
affiliation, reconciliation,
things of that sort.
So a gender critique.
Next is a cultural critique.
And there's been a
whole world of people
doing cross-cultural moral
development in [INAUDIBLE] type
studies.
And one thing that you
see is that the stages
don't necessarily move in
this inevitable sequence
in different cultures.
So that has been sort
of a blow to this.
This is how all humans are.
What you also begin
to see is when
you begin to couple
sort of other values
with your moral stage.
For example, what
studies show is people
who are trained in childhood
to respect ability more than
effort are far more likely
to endorse social norm
moral reasoning over
social justice reasoning.
That is shown.
What's that one about?
Again, ability--
having something
that you view as transcendent,
as not intrinsic to sort
of the effort of the person.
That's making no sense.
I just tied that into knots.
Don't listen to
what I just said.
Nonetheless, here's
what they have found.
People who were brought up to
value ability more than effort
tend to value moral
reasoning for social norms
rather than for social justice.
They are less likely to get to
a post-conventional Kohlberg
stage.
So that being one of
the backbones of people
who think about this.
But a whole world
of additional things
in moral development and kids.
How do kids first learn that
sometimes it's OK to lie?
How do kids learn
that, in fact, you're
supposed to tell grandma that
you love the sweater even
though you think it's awful?
Or do not tell her you
already have this toy?
How do you kids learn to lie?
Related to that,
how do kids first
learn the difference between
rules and principles?
Rules that are meant
to be less breakable,
principles where you are having
to balance them to weigh them.
When do kids first learn
about the possibility
of there being bad laws?
That just because
something is a law
doesn't mean it is
necessarily good?
When do kids first start to
consistently make distinctions
between or see the similarities
between intended harm
and successful harm?
At an earlier stage
kids discount activities
that don't actually
produce the harm
that it was meant to
if it's not successful.
When do kids begin to see that
they are more similar than they
initially respond to?
All of these nuances,
subtleties, here.
Other ways that people have
thought about development
of aggression.
Now comes the issue of
peer groups and community
and aspects of what sort of
world are you being exposed to?
What this always
comes down to is,
what are the effects on
violence in growing up
in a violent setting and
being witness to violence
and being a victim of violence?
We've already seen
one realm of this
which is the greater the
incidence of childhood abuse,
the greater the likelihood
of adult anti-social behavior
and a huge
interaction with genes
that have a relevance
to the neurochemistry.
What else is shown?
Consistently, study
after study, shows
that independent of
family circumstances,
socioeconomic status, personal
experience of violence,
after controlling
for all of that,
growing up in a
neighborhood where
there is a lot of violence
feeds into a higher
rate of violence in adulthood.
What it does is rationalize it.
What it does is it desensitizes.
So that is shown consistently.
What is shown is there is even
a stronger effect, tapping
right into this,
when one is witness
to violence within the family.
So violence within
neighborhoods.
This was worked on a
number of years ago.
Sociologist,
psychiatrist at Harvard
named Felton Earls going through
very, very careful studies
controlling for all
sorts of factors
of how many violent
acts were kids
seeing in various
communities as they grew up.
And that is a very strong
predictor in and of itself.
Violent acts within the
family even more so.
That, of course,
brings up another one
of the great perpetual
questions is,
what is the effect on
adult violence of having
been a kid growing up watching
a lot of violent television
or a lot of violent movies
or, as the studies are now
beginning to be there, to
ask violent video games?
What's that one about?
And every parent for
decades has known,
of course, what the worry,
which is watching violence
in any sort of version
of media like this
is going to foster
violence intensely.
Well studied subject.
And what the results
generally show
is-- yes, here it comes again.
The same exact thing.
Watching a lot of violent
television when you were a kid
makes you more violent
if you already are
tending towards being violent.
What it does is it exaggerates
the pre-existing social
tendencies.
You know that drill by now.
After this lecture you could now
pull out half a dozen examples
of x does not cause whatever,
but it magnifies or blunts
preexisting tendencies.
That's what the literature
consistently shows.
Violent television,
movies, reading material
and violent video games does
not increase the likelihood
of being violent.
It's only in kids
who are already
predisposed towards that.
Next, more aspects
of environment.
Here we have the summary of
the classic study that was
done a couple of decades ago.
Couple at the University of
Toronto named Daly and Wilson.
And what they did was
look at the likelihood
of men committing murder
as a function of their age.
And they were interested in age
because they were viewing that
as a proxy for
testosterone levels.
And what they showed looking
in three different cities--
Chicago, Toronto, and London--
which was in all those cities
your likelihood of being
violent or committing a murder,
if you were male was
somewhere late teenage years
into early 20s or so.
I drew this a little bit wrong.
And that was fascinating
to them because that
happens to be the time of life
when males have their highest
testosterone levels.
And what was hugely
interesting in that study
was that the curves were
superimposable in these three
different cities.
One American city, one Canadian
city, one British city.
So you could now ask
the sort of question
that we've had coming up
since the behavior genetics
lectures, which is if
you could know only one
thing about these
group of individual men
and you want to know
something about predictability
of their being aggressive,
what's the one thing you would
want to know?
Well, it would be mighty useful
to know how old they are.
Because this suggests a big
age effect and maybe that's
got something to do with
the high testosterone
at that point.
And one of these sort
of relevant to that,
sort of a classic sort of
sound byte in criminology,
is one of the leading causes of
a decrease in criminal behavior
is people turning age 25.
It's a very, very strong
maturational curve.
So look at that.
Look at this is important.
This is sort of life
history trajectory.
But then you look at something
even more interesting,
which is you ask, so how
many murders are there
in each of these cities?
And in their database the
London one averaged 30 year,
Toronto averaged 50, and
Chicago averaged 600.
So now you have a choice.
You could find out one
fact and one fact only.
Do I want to know how old this
individual is or-- let's even
be fancier-- do I want
to know this individual's
testosterone levels and his age?
Do I want to know
that information
or do I want to know what
society he's been growing up
with?
Without question you
get more predictability.
This is far more important.
We now can sort of put
inheritability type
interpretations.
Yeah, this is important.
But it doesn't hold
a candle to whatever
these environmental factors
are in there-- far, far
bigger effects than the
age effect happening here.
What else?
So again, this business
about socialization involving
lots of teaching of context.
And more evidence for this
came from one of the all time
classic studies, one that
was referred to in the sex
lectures.
And this was the work
by that guy Harry Harlow
raising captive rhesus monkeys.
And we heard
different variations.
Raising them without a mother.
Raising them in social
groups with peers.
Raising them in complete
social isolation.
And what we heard
last week was, it
did not change the fixed action
patterns of sexual behavior.
It changed the context.
In other words,
you had monkeys who
had grown up in some of the most
of the isolated environments
and they were trying to do sex
normally but just with things
that the monkeys don't
normally have sex with.
The same exact thing in the
realm of aggression here.
Being raised, for example,
in social isolation
as a rhesus monkey, then in
the young adulthood you're
put into a social group and you
have perfectly normal threat
yawns.
You have perfectly normal
fixed action patterns
of dominance and subordination.
What you don't know is who
you should be doing it to.
And Harlow showed that
these animals then put
into social groups
were threatening
high ranking males
they shouldn't
have been going anywhere near.
Were terrified and
subordinating themselves
to little pipsqueak infants
there, things of that sort.
They had not learned the
appropriate social context.
And that's an awful
lot of what's going on.
Example of this.
And this is one that
I actually observed
in my baboons some years ago
and this business about context.
Back to baboons and female
baboons, the business there.
If you are a high
ranking female,
you have far more options to
be aggressive than if you're
a low ranking one.
You inherit your rank
from your mother.
If your mother is
number one in the troop,
you, her first daughter,
will be number two.
If your mother was number 12
and your her second daughter,
you're going to be number 14.
It's a hereditary system.
And this was some
years ago where it just
happened in one of my troops
the highest ranking female who
was still fertile,
her mother matriarch
was one step above her.
But this female,
the highest ranking
for a female, gave birth,
had her first daughter.
And it just happened
a day later one
of the lower ranking
females in the troop
also gave birth
and had a daughter.
So suddenly you've got this
great side by side comparison.
And what you see was every
developmental landmark
the high ranking kid was hitting
earlier than the other kid just
in terms of sheer physical
maturation, coordination,
all of that.
When they were about
a week old, they
had their first
social interaction.
Low ranking infant spots
the high ranking one
and obviously is
thrilled, finally
seeing somebody else
the same size as them
instead of just looking
at everybody's knees.
And the low ranking
one goes wobbling over
to sort of greet this other one.
And as she gets about
three steps away
from a high ranking
infant, low ranking mom
leans over, grabs her
daughter by the tail,
and pulls her back.
And she had just
gotten her first lesson
in her appropriate social rank
and her appropriate social
behavior.
She had just gotten
the first lesson
that that is not somebody you
go up to and interact with.
If you're going to
interact with her,
what it's going to consist
of is you sitting real still
and don't make any
eye contact and hope
she doesn't notice you.
And if she does, immediately
make a subordinate gesture.
You do not go and walk
up to her to greet her.
And the amazing thing is
at that point you pick up
and you come back 25
years later and there
are going to be two old ladies
out in the savanna there doing
the same exact
ominous interactions
that they learned in
their first week of life.
Very, very early social
training for this.
Finally, another bit of evidence
for that social training, which
we already heard about, the
captive hyenas growing up
without adults there
took much longer
to come through with the
same social dominance system
that you would see with
animals in the wild.
So the question then
becomes, amid all
of this social environment
mattering hugely,
how important are parents and
how important is peer group?
And a very, very
interesting book
came out about a decade
ago by a psychologist
named Judith Rich Harris
called The Nurture Assumption.
And what she did was
basically strongly
attack the literature
on parental influence
on child development.
And her argument was
that peer influences
are vastly more powerful than
the field usually recognizes.
Great story with her.
She was about 60 at the time.
And many decades before she
had been a graduate student
in psychology at Harvard.
And something was
not working out
and she was expelled
from the program.
And the chair of the
department, a guy named
George Miller at the time,
was the one who told her
that this wasn't working out.
So good luck and off
you go to trade school
and she proceeded to,
never finishing her degree,
become a science writer
and writing science books
for kids or whatever.
And around age 55 she started
writing this book, which
wound up being an
amazing book, extremely
influential in the field, where
she got all sorts of prizes
for being the first
book by a young author.
Young author, 60 years
old at that point.
And one of the great
ironies was she
got like the grand
prize for the first book
at the annual meeting of
the American Psychological
Association, getting this
prize called the George Miller
Award given out by the now
very elderly George Miller.
So one of those like a nice
ironic ending things and she
didn't like trip him up
or something like that
as she perhaps might
have considered.
So Judith Rich Harris.
So her basic argument is that
peer socialization is really,
really one of the
most powerful things.
And where she
begins her argument
is one which, as soon
as you think about it,
is really striking.
You look at children who are
growing up in a household
where the home language
is a different one
than the dominant
language in the culture.
You're growing up in
an immigrant family.
And what the studies show
is by age four or five
you were developing the accent
of the community around you,
of your peer groups.
By age four or five
you were already
beginning to become embarrassed
by your parent's accent.
By age four or five
you were beginning
to answer their questions
or their conversation
in the home language
and answering it
in the outside language.
This occurs at an
amazingly early age.
And as soon as you
think about it, oh,
of course, somebody whose
parents are from Maine
but they grew up
down in Louisiana,
they're not going to grow
up with a Maine accent.
They may be able to mimic
their parents very readily.
But they're going to
develop a regional accent.
People pick up the accents
of their peer group,
not of their parents.
So she uses that sort of
as the jumping off point
for beginning to argue all the
different ways in which peer
groups are the
things that matter.
And at the end of
the day what parents
are mostly good for is
determining what peer groups
kids have access to.
Sort of evidence she would show.
And this begins
the whole world of
conformity and conventionalized
behavior by groups.
This begins a whole world
of the studies where
showing you arbitrarily break
kids into groups by age group
and they start having
disparaging beliefs
about the other group.
This is suddenly
Zimbardo studies.
This is suddenly put
people arbitrarily
into one category
or role and they
begin to over identify
with that group.
Here is one of the greatest
bits of evidence for peer
socialization I've ever heard.
And this was documented in at
least two different people's
memoirs.
People who were
actors on the set
of the original Planet of
the Apes movies in the 1960s.
And what they noted--
I think you could
either there, besides being one
of the three or four humans,
you could either be
a chimp or a gorilla
or an orangutan all of
which were not anatomically
correct or politically correct.
But what they wound
up seeing there
was two of these
people in their memoirs
noted that by the first week
of filming having happened
people sat at lunch
separated by species.
[LAUGHTER]
All of the actors who
were chimps ate together.
All of the onee-- and these
were people who had friends,
some of their best friends
were orangutans and things
of that sort who they
had known for years.
But two different
people's memoirs
noting sort of-- who were
actors in that-- noting
this bizarre thing that
emerged that people would only
have lunch with their
other primate species.
So that presumably
vindicates everything
that Judith Rich Harris says.
So what she has done is
reinterpret certain findings.
For example, showing that one
of the things that you find
is kids growing up,
boys growing up,
in households without
a father have a higher
chance of anti-social violence
as an adult. And what she does
is take apart that
literature and shows
that what the actual variable
is, is that boys growing up
in families without a
father, single parent
households, single mother,
they are more likely to live
in a poorer neighborhood.
And it is, in fact, the peer
socialization there which
is the driving force on it.
Fancy statistics to show that.
That's the sort of
argument she makes.
Finally, one of the
most interesting studies
that's ever occurred
in this realm
came out about 15 years ago.
One law professor here at
Stanford and one economist
at University of Chicago making
a very interesting argument
as a predictor of criminal
behavior in people.
And what these two did,
Levitt and Donahue, they
dealt with what
was then emerging
as a really interesting
sociological phenomenon which
was that somewhere
since the late 1980s,
the crime rate in this
country has been plummeting.
Every city, every state.
It's been going way down.
And for years people
have been wrestling with,
what's going on the decreased
crime rate in general?
If you have a more conservative
bent which you would emphasize
is building of more prisons
during this period, three
strike laws, things
like that that
have put in more institutional
punishment, more policing.
If you have a more liberal
bent, what you emphasize
is how good the economy
was during the '90s.
But that winds up
being problematic
because the crime
rate has continued
to drop over the last
three, four years
amid the economy tanking.
All these various explanations
explain a bit of it,
but what these guys
argued was as follows.
That the decreased
crime rate that
started in the United
States in the late 1980s
was due to Roe v. Wade.
Here's what they would show.
They would show that as each
state would legalize abortion,
you would have about a
12 to 15 year lag time
before you would start to
have the crime rate drop.
The crime rate during
the first five years
of the crime rate
dropping would entirely
be due to fewer teenagers
entering the criminal justice
system.
By the time it was a
decade and a half or so
past Roe versus-- past
that first point--
the drop in crime rate was
entirely due to fewer 15
to 30-year-olds.
And it just marched out
from there state by state.
What their numbers showed when
they did what were currently
some pretty fancy
convincing statistics
was that Roe versus Wade
accounted for about 50%
of the drop in crime.
What's that telling you?
One of the most depressing
things I can imagine,
which is a huge, huge
predictor of growing up
to be a violent
antisocial individual
is having been born when
nobody wanted you to be born.
And what Roe v. Wade, what
the ability to have abortions,
introduced in much
of the country
at that time-- introduced
was the ability of someone
to not have a child who
they didn't want to have.
Being born to a mother who
doesn't want to have you,
that turns out to be a pretty
big predictor of life not going
well after that.
Final piece.
Final piece in
this, which is now
when you look at all
of this development
and aggression and
moral whatevers,
what does it wind up
looking like in adulthood?
What this translates into
is asking the question,
how much does one stage of
Kohlbergian moral development
actually predict who
does something moral?
In other words, is
there a good correlation
between moral reasoning
and moral behavior?
And what the literature
is absolutely clear on
is there's not a
particularly good connection.
You've got some fancy dancy
post-conventional transcendent
Kohlbergian stage and you even
have a certificate to prove it.
And that's not
remotely a predictor
of you being more likely
to be the person who
steps out of the anonymous crowd
and saves the drowning child.
There's no connection
with Kohlberg stage.
Having the fancier
Kohlberg stage
is a pretty good predictor that
you'll be a moral philosophy
professor of an Ivy League
college instead of a state
school.
If you're stuck in an
earlier Kohlbergian stage,
it's a very abstract
academic measure.
It is not a predictor
at all over who
will do the truly brave,
unexpected moral acts.
So what's of that about?
That taps into something that I
think we've already alluded to
in here, which is certain ways
in which information is stored,
certain places in the
brain that information
is stored as follows.
So there is this
dichotomy in sort
of the neurobiology of
learning between what
is viewed as explicit
learning and implicit.
Explicit declarative learning,
implicit procedural learning.
Explicit declarative
learning is you learn a fact.
You know a fact.
You know that the fact.
You can consciously
make use of the fact
and strategize and use
it in an executive way.
Implicit procedural
memory instead
is stuff that, as always
termed, your hands
know better than your head does.
How to do stuff with your hands.
The other day sort of showing
that in terms of damage
to the amygdala and
the frontal cortex
in people with
Alzheimer's disease.
Explicit declarative
memory goes down the tubes.
But this is the person
who can still knit.
This is the person who
could still drive a car.
Things of that sort.
Procedural implicit
memory is not
stored in the
hippocampus and cortex.
It is predominantly a
phenomenon of the cerebellum.
So you look at the people
who do the profoundly brave
stepping out of the crowd steps.
They're the ones who, regardless
of what their Kohlbergian stage
might be on their essays that
they write for college finals,
when you look at the people
who actually do something
what you see are two factors
that consistently come up.
And this has mostly been studied
by the Carnegie Foundation
that every year gives
out awards for the most
heroic acts of the years.
And they've actually studied
who these people are,
what the differences are.
The first one is that
you have grown up
with a very strong,
consistent, frequently
stated imperative to act
morally and to act bravely
and to not care what
other people think.
That's the first
thing that you see.
And the second thing
that always pops up
is one that is the complete
neurobiological logical outcome
of that, which is when they
then interview these people
and say you leapt
out of this crowd
and ran into this
burning building
and almost got yourself
killed to save this child who
you didn't even know, what were
you thinking when you did it?
And people's answer
is always the same.
I wasn't thinking.
I didn't think.
Before I knew it,
I had run in there.
Before I knew it, I had
leapt into the river.
What are we looking at here?
We are looking at
a moral act not as
the outcome of your frontal
cortex wrestling you
into being brave and
moral and all of that.
You were looking at
an implicit pathway.
You were looking
at, I didn't think.
Before I knew it I have
leapt in the river.
You were looking at what
happens when something is over
learned during childhood.
It is not something that you
have to sit and consciously
wrestle with.
Fascinating paper a few months
ago from that same Josh Greene
who did that trolley car study.
And here what he did was people
were playing some sort of game
where they had to
predict an outcome
and they would get a reward
if they predicted right.
And they set it up in some
totally clever duplicitous way
so that there would
be periods in the game
where the person had
the option to cheat.
And they were able to tell by
the rate at which they were
suddenly getting better
answers if during these periods
suddenly they were being
statistically significantly
more successful
they were cheating.
And they had them
in a brain scanner
and were able to see
what was going on.
So you look at people
who would cheat
and what happens
when the signal comes
on indicating that it's one of
these sessions where they could
get away with cheating.
Their frontal cortexes
lit up like crazy.
What were they doing?
They were wrestling with Satan.
They were asking those neurons
to do something or other down
in the amygdala before they did
the wrong thing and the degree
of frontal activation was not
particularly predictive of who
actually did cheat.
You fell into the
cheater category
if they could show that you ever
cheated during one of these.
And thus looking at you
the rest of a time when
you had the opportunity and
didn't, it wasn't particularly
good predictor of whether
you cheated or not.
But it was a great
predictor of people who were
willing to even cheat once.
So now look at the people
who never ever cheated
and, of course, one
prediction would
be that they have
like frontal neurons
poking out of their head
that are so big and energized
and their frontal cortex
didn't move an inch.
When the possibility
of cheating came up,
there wasn't the remotest
change in frontal activation.
This was not them wrestling
Satan to the ground.
It wasn't there.
There was no temptation.
It was an implicit pathway.
It was not sitting there saying,
oh, what if everyone did this?
And, oh, it's important
that we have laws.
And, oh, what if I get
punished or-- it is simply,
before I knew it,
I had jumped in.
I didn't even think about it.
What I think this suggests
is awful lot of what
moral development is about
in the formal stage world
is what kind of
frontal cortex you're
going to wind up with
reasoning with your amygdala
when you look at
the dissociation
between moral reasoning
and moral behavior
and the ones who do
the truly brave things,
it's got nothing to do
with the frontal cortex.
It's implicit by them.
So we will pick up
on-- what day is it?
Wednesday.
Today's Wednesday?
For more, please visit
us at stanford.edu.